---
title: "Reading 01: Hardware Hackers"
date: 2019-01-27T18:50:44-05:00
draft: false
featured_image: "images/hackers/woz_appleii.png"
description: "The hackers at MIT created Spacewar. The hackers at the Homebrew Computer Club created the personal computer. Guess which one had a bigger impact."
---
The hardware hackers of 1970s California (what would ultimately become Silicon
Valley) thought that it was vital to spread computing to the masses, rejecting
the ivory tower of MIT's AI lab. It was this attitude that eventually led to the
creation of the first microcomputers—computers that could fit in your living
room, not just in university labs or corporate offices. Computers like the
Altair 8800 and the Apple II were inconceivable to the giants of computing: IBM,
HP, and the like. Even Intel, which invented the microprocessor in the 4004 and
later the 8008 and 8080 which allowed these new machines to be built, didn't
really perceive a market for "personal computing."

The "true hackers" of MIT disapproved of the California hardware hackers—the
denizens of MIT were focused on bumming assembly instructions from their
subroutines and having arcane arguments in the TMRC room. They considered BASIC,
the language of choice for the Californians, a "fascist language" because of its
limitations. But the hardware hackers didn't care about the performance
limitations that were so important to the academics. They cared about *making
things*.

And make things they did. They wound up creating the personal computer, which,
of course, transformed computing, more so than any hack that the guys at MIT
ever came up with.

Commercial success, however, was a point of contention among the hackers, as it
seemed to go against the principle of freely sharing information in the Hacker
Ethic. On one extreme you had the heavy pricing of Microsoft and MITS which
garnered disdain among the community. But even for companies like Apple, which
early on promised that it would make software available for "free or at minimal
cost" and distributed the schematics for its Apple II for free, eventually the
open exchange format of the Homebrew Computer Club became untenable, and Woz and
the other hackers at Apple stopped attending. Profits were at stake now, and the
corporatized hackers could not afford to share details of their projects with
competitors.

However much the hacker purists, both at MIT and in the Valley, might have
disapproved of this corporatization, it was necessary, and in my opinion, even
good. Without "planners," as Levy calls them, like Steve Jobs and Adam Osborne,
to create businesses that could ship out millions of computers, computing would
never have spread like it did. And that spread of personal computing did far
more to help spread the Hacker Ethic than the commercialization of the Valley
did to harm it. Bill Gates was right when he said that engineers needed to be
paid for their work, and that professional work would advance the computing
community more than hobbyists alone. Microsoft and MITS may have been wrong to
charge hundreds for their BASIC interpreter, but they were not wrong to charge
*something*.

Moving from the garage to the office came with some compromises, but it was a
necessary step in the evolution (and revolution) of the computing industry.
