---
title: "Reading 03: Hackers and Painters"
date: 2019-02-18T23:06:26-05:00
draft: false
featured_image:
description: "Is Paul Graham's version of a hacker compatible with Steven Levy's
description? Do his arguments for and description of the modern hacker change
your mind about what it means to be a hacker or the desirability of being one?"
---

Paul Graham writes that hackers are creators, makers more similar to artists
than to engineers. He goes so far as to say that the term "software engineering"
is misleading, that hackers should be less concerned with how to do something
than what to do. This is a silly distinction: great hacks often don't do
completely new things, they do something that has already been done, but in a
novel way. Hackers should very much be concerned with how things are done.
However, I do agree that hackers are much more like artists or architects than,
say, civil or aerospace engineers. Designing bridges or airplanes are
fundamentally mechanical tasks, with mechanical, predefined considerations:
weight, cost, traffic capacity, airfoil lift. Designing software can be much
more creative. Yes, mechanical considerations are still there: performance and
reliability. But often there is much more flexibility in the requirements, and
the feature-set for a piece of technology is mostly limited only by imagination.
Further, and as Graham notes, hackers, like artists, learn and create by
_doing_, not by drawing up schematics and doing calculations.

Graham's hacker is not incompatible with Levy's hacker. In fact, I would argue
that they are, at the core, very similar. Graham's painter-hackers embody the
Hands-On Imperative. His essay "What You Can't Say" is dedicated to the free
flow of information. Graham also acknowledges that hackers break rules, and
Levy's Hacker ethic included an affirmation of the art and beauty of computers,
in agreement with Graham's hacker-as-painter.

Graham's description of a hacker is considerably more attractive, however, if
somewhat more vague. For instance, Graham doesn't require that hackers sacrifice
personal hygiene or outside interests. All that Graham requires of a hacker is
that they think creatively, refuse to blindly follow cultural norms and
traditional authority, and are a nerd, which for Graham is simply someone who is
more interested in _doing_ good than _looking_ good.

I find that Graham's description of hackers working like painters by doing is
particularly compelling. I've never been able to sit down and completely plan
out a project before jumping into it, whether I'm told to write an outline for a
paper or draw out a design for software data flow. Instead I find the best way
to create software is to start writing, quickly building an initial piece of
software, fixing bugs and making (and revising) design choices as I go. However,
I do take issue with Graham's criticism of static typing. But that's a separate
argument.

However I must cautiously disagree with Graham's views in "What You Can't Say."
While I appreciate his call to view cultural norms and taboos with skepticism, I
think there exists fundamental differences between fashion and moral frameworks.
Fashion, as he rightly points out, is arbitrary, capricious, and all-too-often
misguided. I would like to believe moral views are given to more rational
thought and consideration. Perhaps I have just been indoctrinated like the
suburban teenage girl of Graham's example, but the moral climate of today seems
wholly better than, say, the antebellum South. Certainly some "moral fashions"
could be misguided (and some I think are), but to hear Graham tell it, no
progress has been made at all, and all changes in societal morals are
inconsequential. I'd like to believe we're all just a bit smarter than that.
